# Histogram

> Approximate representation of the distribution of the numerical data. The term was first introduced by [Karl Pearson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Pearson)
> 

It is a chart that plots the distribution of the continuous variable’s values as a series of bars.

Each bars typically covers a range of numeric values as a bin or class

Bar’s height indicates the frequency of data points within the corresponding bin.

- Takes one continuous variable as its input.
- It allows us to answer questions about the shape of the variable’s distribution.

Compared to other summarizing methods, histograms have the **richest descriptive power** while being the fastest way to **interpret data** – the human brain prefers visual perception.

However, if you are not careful, viewers **will not be able to understand** your histogram, or you may fail to get the most out of it. It is especially important to **specify the optimal bin size**.

Wikipedia has an [extensive section on rules of thumb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histogram#Number_of_bins_and_width) for choosing an appropriate number of bins and their sizes, but ultimately, it’s worth using domain knowledge along with a fair amount of playing around with different options to know what will work best for your purposes.

$\text{bin size} \propto \displaystyle\frac{1}{\text{number of bins}}$

The larger the bin sizes, the fewer bins there will be to cover the whole range of data. With a smaller bin size, the more bins there will need to be. It is worth taking some time to test out different bin sizes to see how the distribution looks in each one, then choose the plot that represents the data best. If you have too many bins, then the data distribution will look rough, and it will be difficult to discern the signal from the noise. On the other hand, with too few bins, the histogram will lack the details needed to discern any useful pattern from the data.

Using the histogram, we can see 

- where the peaks of the distributions are.
- whether the distribution is skewed or symmetric.
- whether there are any outliers.

When interpreting the histogram, we need to look for modality, skewness and kurtosis.

## How many peaks ? (Modality)

When interpreting histograms, the first thing to look at is the modality of the distribution.

Distribution with one peak - **Unimodal**

Distribution with two peak - **Bimodal**

Distribution with three peak - **Trimodal**

## Is it symmetric ? (**Skewness)**

Outliers on the left - **Left Skewed** distribution

Outliers on the right - **Right Skewed** distribution

## How many extreme values ? (Kurtosis)

A **mesokurtic** distribution is something that looks like the bell curve from a normal distribution.

A **leptokurtic** distribution has a narrow peak and lots of extreme values. (This distribution is important in finance)

A ********platykurtic******** distribution has a broad peak and few extreme values.